Add GraphQL vs. REST Design Decision Overview (#260)
learning-software-engineering/learning-software-engineering.github.io: Topics/Development_Process/GraphQL_VS_REST.md

# GraphQL and REST APIs

## Table of Contents
1. [Overview & Motivation](#overview--motivation)
    - [What is an API?](#what-is-an-api)
    - [Why do we need APIs?](#why-do-we-need-apis)
    - [Designing APIs](#designing-apis)
2. [REST Overview](#rest-overview)
3. [GraphQL Overview](#graphql-overview)
4. [When does REST make sense to use?](#when-does-rest-make-sense-to-use)
5. [When does GraphQL make sense to use?](#when-does-graphql-make-sense-to-use)
6. [Quick Reference](#quick-reference-for-common-uses)
7. [Summary](#summary)
8. [Additional Readings](#additional-reading)

## Overview & Motivation
### What is an API?
An API is an **application programming interface**, or in simpler words, a way for two pieces of software to communicate with one another.

> On this page, we will refer to things called `endpoints`. These are basically access ways for our API - you use these endpoints to communicate with the software.

Reviewer: I think you could add an example of both an API and an endpoint. A definition/explanation might be a bit vague for some people, whereas an example would make things very clear

Author: Great idea! I've added it in a new commit :)

### Designing APIs
In this article, we will specifically discuss APIs that deal with sending requests over the internet, which is a very special case of APIs. We will cover two special commonly used types of APIs:
1. REST
2. GraphQL 

On this page, you will learn about the differences between the two, and hopefully be able to make a confident decision on which one you need to use, based on your project requirements. 

## REST Overview
A REST API is any API that follows the REST architecture. The implementation of it can be handled in many pre-existing libraries, so this page will focus on the important details:
1. In REST, you have to specify the `type` of the request you are sending when you call an API endpoint.
    + Some common examples include `GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, and `DELETE`. Others exist, but these are the ones used most often.

> 2. REST is not specific; when you call an endpoint, you will get *all* of the data that endpoint can give, whether you like it or not.

Reviewer: I'm a little confused about the "you will get all of the data that endpoint can give", could you clarify what this means?

Author: I mean that there is no way to specify exactly what data you want; for example, if you are trying to get some data for a specific User through REST, when you call the GET User endpoint, you can't specify that you just want their first name. You have to GET their entire User object and then parse the response to get their first name. I will update this to be more clear!

Author: I made the change now, please let me know if you think that clarifies what your question was :)

Reviewer: Oh alright, that makes total sense. I think it was just the wording that threw me off. Your changes clarify this, thanks!

Author: Awesome! Thank you so much. Do you think there is any ambiguity in any other part of this section?

Reviewer: Nope, I think the rest of this section is very clear and gives a good overview of REST. Nice job!

    + This can be ideal when you require a lot of data, but can also lead to larger than necessary load on your system if you have to call many API endpoints in quick succession.

> 3. Every difference type of request in REST has to be called to a different endpoint. For instance, if you want to `GET` all `Users` and `Cars` at the same time, with a typical REST API, you would need to send two seprate `GET` requests to a `/users` and `/cars` endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Every different type of request in REST has to be called to a different endpoint. For instance, if you want to `GET` all `Users` and `Cars` at the same time, with a typical REST API, you would need to send two separate `GET` requests to a `/users` and `/cars` endpoint.

```

Author: Oops 😅 . That's really embarrassing for me. Thanks for the catch :)

## GraphQL Overview

> GraphQL is difference from REST in the sense that it is not actually an API architecture. In fact, it is actually a `query language`, hence the QL in its name. This leads to a number of distinct characteristics that we will discuss:

Reviewer: same comment as above!

Author: Fixed it here as well 😅

1. In GraphQL there are only two types of requests: `Queries`, and `Mutations`. A query is used to get data, i.e, "query" some data. Everything else would be a mutation; creating, updating, or deleting data all mutate, and thus they are mutations.
    + To follow proper GraphQL standards, any endpoint that only sends back data would fall under `query`. Any endpoint that changes data in any way would fall under `mutation`.

> 2. GraphQL is very specific; when you call an endpoint, you can request *exactly* what data you want, and you can send different structures of data, based on customizable `types`.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how this would be different from REST other than only having 1 endpoint. Can't you also request exactly what data you want in REST?

Author: I think we may have already resolved this in a previous conversation; could you confirm that? Thanks!

Author: Great!

> 3. GraphQL only requires one endpoint. Usually, this is found at the `/graphql` URL on a webapp. Since GraphQL is a query language, whenever call the endpoint, you use the request body to specify your query. From this, you can define mutations and queries, and can in fact, get multiple pieces on data through one request. Using the same example from REST, you would only need to send one `/graphql` request, and just write both queries for data in the same request. This allows you to get the same amount of data using one request instead of two separate ones.

Reviewer: I think you should clarify more on what you mean by sending both queries in the same request, perhaps with an example of some sort.

Author: Sounds good! Do you think that just an example would be sufficient, or should I explain it more in words?

Reviewer: I think both would be good to have together! It would make this point a lot easier to understand for those who are new to GraphQL.

Reviewer: That's a good idea, I think that would definitely aid the reader in understanding. Now that I think about it, an both an example and an explanation might be too much in one place, so breaking them up is great!

Author: Great, I've added them both!!

## When does REST make sense to use?
REST makes the most sense if you deal with simple data, and you do not need to only get specific pieces of data; getting all of what you need is okay. In other words, if you're getting a User's data, for instance, you are okay with getting all of their data, instead of just their username for instance.

## When does GraphQL make sense to use?

> GraphQL makes sense if you are dealing with quite complicated data, especially if it is large swaths of data where you might only need a specific chunk of it. It also makes sense if you need to get numerous different pieces of data at the same time, and want to do so efficiently. GraphQL is much faster than REST in terms of actual efficiency of getting data, but has a trade-off of a complex set up compared to REST.

Reviewer: I think you should explain more about how/why GraphQL is faster and more efficient at getting data than REST, and also explain more about why it has a more complex trade off compared to REST.

Author: Sounds good! I spoke a bit about it being faster because you can send multiple requests in the same query, and also that you can request specific pieces of data (so you could have really big, complex data structures). Do you think it makes sense to add to this section, or should I add it somewhere else?

Reviewer: Yes, that definitely makes sense to add it to this section, as it explains why GraphQL is powerful and good to use. Thanks for clearing it up!

## Quick reference for common uses
In JavaScript, you can implement REST APIs through ExpressJS. Here is an example request, where you would call an already existing API request using fetch(). 
```javascript
const response = await fetch("http://example.com/movies.json", {
  method: "POST",
  body: JSON.stringify({
    name: "Barbie",
    director: "Greta Gerwig",
    stars: [
        "Margot Robbie"
    ]
  })
});
```

You can implement GraphQL in JavaScript with the GraphQL library. Here is an example GraphQL query, where you would get the director of the Barbie movie, similarly to the above request.
```graphql
query {
  getMovie(params: {
    name: "Barbie"
  }) 
  { director }
}

> ```

Reviewer: I think this concrete example of comparing REST API and GraphQL is really great and definitely makes things very clear!

Author: Glad to hear :)

For more information on setting up and creating your own API through REST or GraphQL, you can visit their respective documentation here:
- https://graphql.org/graphql-js/
- https://expressjs.com/en/starter/hello-world.html

## Summary

> In summary, there are many similar uses for GraphQL and REST. They can both accomplish the same things, but depending on your data structure, one would be better in terms of efficiency and complexity of development. GraphQL requires a lot more boilerplate code, and needs types and queries set up, while REST's setup just requires a few lines defining some simple endpoints.

Reviewer: This is a really great summary of the article you wrote. Great job!

> ## Additional Reading

Reviewer: I think you could add a resource about the performance differences between GraphQL and REST

Author: Sounds good! I added one
